1 
 PART I  
STATICALLY DETERMINATE STRUCTURES  
CHAPTER 1  
OVERVIEW OF STRUCTURAL MECHANICS  AND GEOMETRIC AL 
ANALYSES  OF PLANAR STRUCTURES  
UNIT 1  
OVERVIEW OF STRUCTURAL MECHANICS  
I. Objects and study tasks  
1. Objects  
For civil engineering, some structures such as  buildings, bridges, dams, marine and 
mines structures, are the objects that need to be studied.  In fact, c onstruction 
materials include stone, wood, steel, reinforced concrete  (RC) , fiber reinforced 
polymer  (FRP) , etc. These materials have different mecha nical properties, however, 
in structural analysis, the research objects are commonly considered as elastic 
deformed solid  (Fig. 1.1) . 
  
(a) The office building  (b) The highway bridge  
Fig. 1.1  
2 
 Structural analysis is performed to make sure that the struc ture satisfies three 
requirements related to strength, deformation and stability in service.  
Strength requirement:  The structures have capacity for working in the condition of 
non-damaged failure under the loading or other outside impacts.  
Deformation requ irement:  The structures have capacity for working with the 
maximum deformation or displacement that does not exceed the allow limitation.  
Stability requirement:   The structures have capacity to work in normal condition s, 
to maintain its position or state i n its original deformation, without slipping, 
overturning, settling or deviating from its original position.  
2. Study tasks  
The main tasks of structural analysis are to determine internal force  components 
including bending moment, shear force and axial for ce (M, Q, N ) and displacement 
at all sections in the structure  for all common structures subjected to loads or some 
other external causes.  
3. Two kinds of structural problem s  
a. Examining  structural problems  
In the kind of exami ning problems, there is a real structure constructed (building or 
bridge) with  the determined materials, dimensions and loading , we conduct the 
determination of internal force and deformation in the structure . Based on that, we 
can examine strength, deformation and stability require ments.  
b. Designing structural problems  
Based on the design tasks, we need to choose appropriate materials and dimensions, 
then determine loading applied to the structure.  Next, the examining process would 
be performed to check the strength, deformation an d stability requirements.  The 
calculation can result in one of three cases below.  
- Case 1: The structure satisfied with the technical and economic requirements. 
It is ok ; so we can change to the next step, detailed designing.  3 
 - Case 2: The structure did not s atisfy the technical requirements (strength, 
deformation and stability). It is not  ok; we need to redesign by reducing 
loading or increasing the  structural components’ dimensions or  strength  of the 
chosen materials.  
- Case 3: The structure satisfied the tech nical requirement but did not with 
economic requirement.  It is not ok; we need to redesign by increasing loading 
or reducing the structural components’ dimensions or strength  of the chosen 
materials.  
 
II. Idealized structure (analytical model)  
An exact ana lysis of a structure can never be carried out, since estimates always have 
to be made of the loadings and the strength of the materials composing the structure. 
Furthermore, points of application for the loadings must also be estimated. It is 
important, th erefore, that the structural engineer develop s the ability to model or 
idealize a structure so that he or she can perform a practical force analysis of the 
members. In this section we will develop  the basic techniques necessary to do this.  
1. Concept  
Idealized structure or analytical model is the simplified model of a real structure that 
satisfies two requirements including both the appropriate working reflection  of the 
real structure and the simplification  in structural analysis.  
2. Choosing the idealized  structure  
To choose the idealized structure, we can follow the two main steps, (a) changing 
from the real structure to the partially idealized structure, and then (b) changing from 
the partially idealized structure to the idealized structure.  
(a) Changing from the real structure to the partially idealized structure  
Conduct as follows:  4 
 - Replace the columns and beams by their axial lines  and replace the slabs by 
their middle surfaces.  
- Replace the factors related to the materials and member section properties by 
the elastic modulus ( E), area of cross -section ( A), cross -section moment of 
inertia ( I), etc.  
- Replace the support devices  by idealized support connections such as the pin 
connection, the roller support, and the fixed joint  depending on the intent of 
the designer . 
- Transfer the actual loadings acting on the building’s outside surfaces into the 
loading plane.  
(b) Changing from the partially idealized structure to the idealized structure  
When necessary, we can eliminate some none important things  (idealizati on) to 
obtain the idealized structure  (analytical model)  that is simple for the structural 
analysis process.  
3. Example  
Please choose the analytical model for the reinforced concrete ( RC) truss of the 
building ’s roof as given in Fig. 1.2a . 
 
(a) The  roof structure  
2P
2P
1P2P
1P
E, FA B
lDàn BTCTC?tT?m l?p
Xà g?
A Ba
Reinforced concrete tru ss Column  
L: Truss span  Roof cladding  
Purlin  5 
  
(b) The partially analytical model  
 
(c) The analytical model  
Fig. 1.2  
Another example of choosing the idealized structure for a simple steel frame as can 
be seen in Fig. 1.3.  
  
(a) Actual structure  (b) Idealized structure  
Fig. 1.3  
2P
2P
1P2P
1P
E, FA B
lDàn BTCTC?tT?m l?p
Xà g?
A Ba

2P
2P
P2P
P
E, F
lA Bb
L 
L 6 
 The ability to reduce an actual structure to an idealized form, as shown by these 
examples, can only be gained by experience.  In engineering practice, if it becomes 
doubtful as to how to model a structure or transfer the loads to the members, it i s 
best to consider several idealized structures and loadings and then design the actual 
structure so that it can resist the loadings in all the idealized models.  
 
III. Structural classifications  
There are two ways for classifying structures including class ifications according to 
analytical model and method of analysis.  
1. Classification based on the analytical model  
By this way, the structures are divided into two main kinds : planar and space 
structures.  
1.1. Planar structures  
Planar structur e is a structur e that its composed members lie in a plane  and it is 
subjected to a force system that lies in the same  plane. There  are s everal  types of 
planar structures such as beams, frames, trusses, arcs, and complex /combined  
structures.  Some examples of these structu res are given as below  (Figs. 1.4 – 1.8). 
 Beams  
 
Fig. 1.4  
 Frames  
  
Fig. 1.5  
a) b) c)
7 
  Trusses  
  
Fig. 1.6  
 
 Arches 
  
Fig. 1.7  
 Complex /combined  structures  
  
Fig. 1.8  
 
1.2. Space structures  
Space  structures are composed of members that lie in the three -dime nsional space  
and the external loadings acting on structures also lie in that space .  
Space structure is a structure that its composed members lie in a three -dimensional 
space and it is subjected to a force system that lies in the same space. There  are 
several types of space  structures such as intersection  beams, space frames, space 
trusses, and space arches/shells . Some examples of these structures are given as 
below  (Fig. 1.9) . 
b)
8 
   
(a) Intersection beams  (b) Space frame  
  
(c) Space truss  (d) Space sh ell 
Fig. 1.9  
2. Classification based on the method of analysis  
a. According to static point of view  
There are two types including statically determinate structures and statically 
indeterminate structures.  
 Statically determinate structures:  The equilibrium  equations provide both the 
necessary and sufficient conditions for equilibrium. When all the forces in a 
structure  can be determined strictly from these equations, the structure is 
referred  to as statically determinate . 
 Statically indeterminate structures : The equilibrium equations provide both 
the necessary and sufficient conditions for equilibrium. Structures having 
more unknown forces than available equilibrium equations are called 
statically indeterminate . 
b. According to kinematic  point of view  
9 
 There are two types including kinem atically determinate structures and 
kinematically  indeterminate structures.  
 Kinematically determinate structures:  It is a structure when subjected to the 
compulsive displacement of a node leading a deflection shape that we can 
determine all displacement components of remain ing nodes by only using the 
kinematic conditions.  
 Kinematically indeterminate structures: It is a structure when subjected to the 
compulsive displacement of a node leading a deflection shape that we can not 
determine all displacement components of remain ing nodes by using just the 
kinematic conditions.  
 
IV. External causes  leading to internal loadings/forces and 
deflections/ displacements  
The external loads, temperature, settlement and fabrication errors  of struc tural 
members are causes creating the internal forces and displacements at any point or 
whole structure.  
1. External loadings  
The external loadings acting on a structure will create internal forces and 
displacements  for both s tatically determinate structur es and s tatically indeterminate 
structures . The loading classification is shown as below:  
a. According to acting  time 
There are two types including long -term loading (dead loading) and short -term 
loading (live loading) . 
b. According to acting location 
There are two types including non -moving loading and mov ing loading.  
c. According to acting approach  
There are two types including static loading and dynamic loading.  10 
 d. According to acting form  
There are three types including concentrated loading, distributed  loading and 
bending moment loading.  
2. Environmental temperature  
The temperature fluctuations will create displacements in statically determinate 
structures and both internal forces and displacements in  statically indeterminate 
structures . 
3. Settlement a nd fabrication errors of structural members  
As the same as environmental temperature, t he support settlement and fabrication 
errors of structural members will create displacements in statically determinate 
structures and both internal forces and displaceme nts in  statically indeterminate 
structures . 
 
V. Idealized assumptions and principle of superposition  
1. Idealized assumptions  
Two requirements must be imposed for the principle of superposition to apply:   
a. The material must behave in a linear -elastic man ner, so that Hooke’s law is valid, 
and therefore the load will be proportional to displacement  (Fig. 1.10a) . 
b. The geometry of the structure must not undergo significant change when the loads 
are applied, i.e., small displacement theory applies  (Fig. 1.10 b). Large displacements 
will significantly change the position and orientation of the loads. An example would 
be a cantilevered thin rod subjected to a force at its end.  11 
   
(a) Linear -elastic material  (b) Small displacement theory  
Fig. 1.10  
2. Princip le of superposition  
The principle of superposition forms the basis for much of the theory of structural 
analysis. It may be stated as follows: The total displacement or  internal loadings 
(stress) at a point in a structure subjected to several  external load ings can be 
determined by adding together the displacements  or internal loadings (stress) 
caused by each of the external loads acting  separately . For this statement to be valid 
it is necessary that a linear  relationship exist among the loads, stresses, and  
displacements.  
O 
 0 0 12 
  
Fig. 1.11  
 
Based on the principle of superposition, we have: V A = V A1   V A2; V B = V B1   V B2; 
and ΔC = ΔC1   ΔC2, as can be seen in Fig. 1.11.   
 
UNIT 2  
GEOMETRIC AL ANALYSES  OF PLANAR STRUCTURES   
I. Concepts  
In general, then, a structure w ill be geometrically unstable  - that is, it will move 
slightly or collapse  - if there are fewer reactive forces than equations of equilibrium; 
or if there are enough reactions, instability will occur if the lines of action of the 
reactive forces intersect at a common point or are parallel to one another . If the 
structure consists of several members or  components, local instability of one or 
VA
VA1P1
VA2AP2
BB AA BP1 P2
VB
VB1
VB2C
C
C
C1
C
C 2  13 
 several of these members can  generally be determined by inspection . If the members 
form a collapsible  mechanism, the s tructure will be unstable.  
1. Geometrically stable structure s 
Geometrically stable structure  is a structure that can keep its geometrical shape when 
subject to an external loading if structural members were considered as absolutely 
rigid bodies. The struct ure shown as in Fig. 1.12 is a typical example of 
geometrically stable structure s. 
 
Fig. 1.12  
2. Geometrically unstable structures  
Geometrically unstable structure  is a structure that can not keep its geometrical shape 
when subject to an external loading although  structural members were considered as 
absolutely rigid bodies. The structure shown as in Fig. 1.1 3 is a typical example of 
geometrically unstable structure s. 
 
Fig. 1.13  
3. Geometrically semi -unstable structures  
Geometrically (transient -) semi-unstable structure is a structure that will change its 
geometrical shape in very small amount when subject to an external loading although 
 
 14 
 structural members were considered as absolutely rigid bodies. The structure shown 
as in Fig. 1.14 is a typical example o f geometrically (transient -) semi-unstable 
structures . 
 
Fig. 1.14  
4. Rigid body and degree s of freedom  
a. Rigid body  (structural member)  
Any geometrically stable structure is considered as a rigid body. Symbol and 
examples of the rigid body can be seen i n Fig. 1.1 5. 
   
(a) Rigid body’s 
symbol  (b) Rigid body in static 
determinacy  (c) Rigid body in static 
indeterminacy  
Fig. 1.15  
b. Degree s of freedom  
When a structure is loaded, specified points on it, called nodes, will undergo 
unknown displacements. T hese displacements are referred to as the degrees of 
freedom for the structure . The number of these  unknowns is referred to as the degree 
in which the structure is kinematically indeterminate . In three dimensions, each node 
on a frame or beam can have at most three linear displacements and three rotational 
displacements; and in two dimensions, each node can have at most two linear 
displacements and one rotational displacement.  
15 
 Therefore, in two dimensions, a rigid body or a cross section on a frame or beam has 
at most three degrees of freedom including two linear displacements and one 
rotational displacement  (Fig. 1.16a) . Meanwhile, for a truss when there is only axial 
force component in all truss members, the node’s degrees of freedom include  two 
linear dis placements only  (Fig. 1.16b) . 
  
(a) Rigid body’s degree of freedom  (b) Node’s degree of freedom  
Fig. 1.16  
 
II. Connection types  
As known, the connections are used to connect structural members together or 
between the structural members and the supporti ng devices or foundation’s ground.  
In general, there are two main connection types including simple connections and 
complex connections. In which, a simple connection is used to connect two structural 
members or rigid bodies together , and a complex connect ion is used to connect three 
or more than three  rigid bodies together.  
1. Simple connections  
Structural members are joined together in various ways depending on the intent of 
the designer.  The three types of joints most often specified are the pin connecti on, 
the roller support, and the fixed joint. A pin -connected joint and a roller support 
allow some freedom for slight rotation, whereas a fixed joint allows no relative 
rotation between the connected members and is consequently more expensive to 
yo
Oy
MC
(xo,yo,)
xo x
O xy
M
(xo,yo)
xoyo16 
 fabricate.  Some typically supported connections with metal or concrete material are 
shown in Figs. 1.17 and 1.18, respectively.  
  
(a) Typical pin -supported connection 
(metal)  (b) Typical fixed -supported connection 
(metal)  
Fig. 1.17  
  
(a) Typical roller -suppo rted connection 
(concrete)  (b) Typical fixed -supported connection 
(concrete)  
Fig. 1.18  
Therefore, simple connections are divided in to three types  including type 1 (roller 
connection), type 2 (pin connection) and type 3 (fixed connection). It  depend s the 
degrees  of freedom  that each connection  type can prevent.  The formation and 
reaction of these connections are presented in Figs. 1.19 – 1.21. 
a. Type-1 connection 
17 
   
(a) Type-1 connect ed formation  (b) Type-1 connected reaction  
Fig. 1.19  
b. Type-2 connect ion  
  
(a) Type-2 connect ed formation  (b) Type-2 connected reaction  
Fig. 1.20  
c. Type-3 connection 
 
 
(a) Type-3 connect ed formation  (b) Type-3 connected reaction  
Fig. 1.21  
 
2. Complex connections  
Complex connect ions are divided into two types including complexly -pinned 
connection and complexly -fixed connection  (Fig. 1.22). 
(A) (B)R
R
(A) (B)
(A) Rx
Ry
R
(B) (A)
Ry
(A)
RRx
R
dM = R.d
(A) (B)18 
   
(a) Complexly -pinned connection ,  
p = 2 (b) Complexly -fixed connection ,  
p = 3 
Fig. 1.22  
 
Complex degree  of a complex connection is the number of correspondingly  simple 
connections. Symbol of the complex degree is p = D – 1, in which D is the number 
of the rigid bodies that have been connected at the complex connection.  
 
III. How to connect rigid bodies into a geometrically stable structure  
For connec ting some rigid bodies to form a geometrically stable structure, we need 
to solve two main problems. Firstly, we determine the minimum number of 
connections used for this purpose, called the prerequisite  or necessary condition s. 
Secondly, we need to prove that the reasonable  arrangement of these connections is 
done or not to obtain a geometrically stable structure, called the sufficient condition s. 
1. Prerequisite /necessary  conditions  
For advantage in analysis, the structures can be divided into two groups namely 
beams -frames and trusses, which are connected to the foundation ground or not 
connected to.  
a. For beams and frames  
 Prefabricated beams and frames  
Assuming that there are D rigid bodies connected by T type-1 connections, K type-
2 connections, and H type-3 connec tions (transferred to corresponding ly simple 
(A)
(B)(C)
(A)(B)(D)
(C)19 
 connections). A ssume a selected rigid body is the static member, using T, K, H 
connections mentioned above to connect ( D-1) remaining rigid bodies  with the static 
member  to form a g eometrically stable structure . Therefore, th e requirement is to 
prevent 3( D-1) degrees of freedom and the ability to prevent ( T 2K 3H) degrees of 
freedom. Calculate  the value n = (ability) – (requirement) = ( T 2K 3H) - 3(D-1) = 
T 2K 3H 3-3D. Argumentation:  
If n < 0, it means shortage of connections;  
If n = 0, it means e nough  connections  and the structure has an ability to be 
geometrically stable  (statically determinate structures , if yes);  
If n > 0, it means redundancy of connections  and the structure has an ability to be 
geometrically stable  (statically indeterminate struct ures, if yes); 
Conclusions: n = T 2K 3H 3-3D ≥ 0       (1.1) 
 Beams and frames connected to foundation ground  
Solving the problem as same as the subsection above with a consideration that the 
Earth is a static member  then we have conclusions as below:  
  n = T 2K 3H C-3D ≥ 0       (1.2) 
(C is the number of connections to the Earth, transferred to equivalent type -1 
connections)  
b. For trusses  
 Trusses connected to foundation ground  
 Assuming that a truss has D linear  members and M pinned joints  connected together 
then to connect to the Earth using C type-1 connections.  The Earth is considered as 
a static member, using D linear  members  (D type-1 connections) to connect  M points 
together  and then to connect to the Earth to form a g eometrically stable structure . 
Therefore, the requirement is to prevent 2M degrees of freedom and the ability to 20 
 prevent ( D C) degrees of freedom. Calculate  the value n = (ability) – (requirement) 
= (D C) – 2M = D C-2M. Argumentation:  
If n < 0, it means shortage of connections;  
If n = 0, it means enough con nections and the structure has an ability to be 
geometrically stable  (statically determinate structures , if yes);  
If n > 0, it means redundancy of connections  and the structure has an ability to be 
geometrically stable  (statically indeterminate structures , if yes); 
Conclusions : n = D C-2M ≥ 0        (1.3) 
 Prefabricated trusses  
Solving the problem as same as trusses connected to the foundation ground  with a 
consideration that any one linear member  of the truss is a static member then we 
have conclusions as below:  
  n = D 3-2M ≥ 0        (1.4) 
2. Suffic ient conditions  
There are reason able arrangements for the used  connections after satisfying the 
prerequisite /necessary  condition s as some ca ses analyzed  as below:  
a. Connecting a point to a rigid body to form a geometrically stable structure  
Using two type -1 connections arranged in two different directions , called a couple,  
to connect a point to a rigid body satisfies both the prerequisite  (necessary) condition 
and sufficient condition.  For example, the geometrically stable  structure and 
geometrically unstable  structur e are shown in Fig. 1.23.  
 Couple ’s characteristics : When adding  into or elimina ting out of a structure  
one or many couples , it does not change the geometric ally (in)stable  
characteristics of the structure.  21 
   
(a) Geometrically stable  structure  (b) Geometrically instable  structure  
Fig. 1.23  
b. Connecting two rigid bodies together to form a geometrically stable structure  
To connect two rigid bodies together to form a g eometrically stable structure , the 
prerequisite  and sufficient conditions are to use at least three equivalent type-1 
connections and to arrange in a reasonable  way. There are three cases as presented 
below:  
 Use three  type-1 connections with their axis directions are not parallel  together 
or intersectional at a point  (Fig. 1.24a); 
 Use one pinned connection and on e type -1 connection with its axis direction 
does no t pass by the pinned connection  (Fig. 1.24b); 
 Use only one fixed connection at any contact point between the two rigid 
bodies  (Fig. 1.24c). 
If we use three type-1 connections with their axis directions are parallel together or 
intersectional at a point , the connected structure will be geometrically instable (Fig. 
1.25).  
   
(a) Three type -1 (b) A pin and one type -1 (c) One fixed  
Fig. 1.24  
(A) (B)
(A) (B)
(A) (B)Couple   22 
    
(a) Intersectional (b) Parallel (l1, l2, l3) (c) Parallel (l = const.) 
Fig. 1 .25 
c. Connecting three rigid bodies together to form a geometrically stable structure  
There are two connected ways including the in-order connection and round -robin 
connection.  In which,  
 For in -order connection, we can use the way of two -member connection  in 
twice  (Fig. 1.26a).  
 For round -robin connection, there are three connections in the three -member 
structure. The necessary  and sufficient conditions to connect three structural 
members together to form a g eometrically stable structure  is to use three 
pinned connecti ons (real or virtual) that do not l ie in the same  straight line  
(Fig. 1.26b). 
   
 
(a) In -order connections  (b) Round -robin connections  
Fig. 1. 26 
In the case of round -robin connection, if three pinned connections lie in a straight 
line, the formed structure is a g eometrically instable structure , as can be seen in Fig. 
1.27.  
(A) (B)
(A) (B)
(B) (A)
(A) (B)
(C)
(A) (B)
(C)
(B) (A)(C)
(A)(B)(C)23 
   
(a) Using a  real pin and two virtual 
pins (b) Using t hree real pins  
Fig. 1.27  
Notes: In the case of connecting more than three rigid b odies or structural members  
together, we should utilize the couple ’s characteristics to reduce the number of  rigid 
bodies. Based on that,  we can partially or fully analyze the given structure using 
three cases abovementioned to determine the geometrically (in)stable characteristics 
of the structure.  
 
IV. Problems for applica tion 
1. Problem 1  
Consider the geometrically (in)stable characteristics of the structure given in Fig. 
1.28a.  
(A)(B)(C)
(A)(B) (C)24 
   
(a) The given structure  (b) The geometrically stable structure  
Fig. 1.28  
Solving  
a. Prerequisite condition  
The given structure is a pin -conn ected frame that is connected to the Earth , hence  
use the formula (1.2) to check the prerequisite condition. Here, we have D = 2, T = 
2, K = 0, H = 0 and C = 2*2 = 4, then n = 2 2*0 3*0 4 -3*2 = 0. It is Ok!  
b. Sufficient condition  
The Earth considered as a  rigid body (I) is connected with two other rigid bodies (II) 
and (III). As can be seen in Fig. 1.28b, three rigid bodies are round -robin (ly) 
connected together by three pinned connections (1,2), (1,3), and (2,3) . Connecting 
these three points will create a triangular so the given structure is geometrically 
stable.  
 
2. Problem 2  
Consider the geometrically (in)stable characteristics of a truss given in Fig. 1.29a.  
2m 2m 2m
2m 2m 2m 2m
(I)(II)
(1,3)(2,3)
(1,2)(III)25 
   
(a) A given truss  (b) The geometrically instable structure  
Fig. 1.29  
Solving  
a. Prerequisite  condition  
This is a prefabricated truss so we can check the prerequisite condition by using the 
formula (1.4). Determine D = 42, M = 22 then n = 42 3 -2*22 =  1 > 0. It is Ok!  
b. Sufficient condition  
Step by step eliminating couples , we have a simpler struct ure as shown in Fig. 1.29b. 
In which, two rigid bodies (I) and (II) are connected together by two type-1 
connections having parallel axis directions. Therefore, it is a geometrically instable 
structure (collapse).  
 
3. Problem 3    
Consider the geometrically (in)stable characteristics of a complex structure given in 
Fig. 1.30.  
26 
  
Fig. 1.30  
Solving  
a. Prerequisite condition  
This is a complex frame structure connected to the Earth, so we can check the 
prerequisite condition by using the formula (1.2).  
 Way 1: Assu ming D = 6, then T = 0, K = 3, H = 2, and C = 2*(2 1) = 6 ; hence 
n = 0 2*3 3*2 6 -3*6 = 0. It is Ok!  
 Way 2: Assuming D = 2, then T = 0, K = 1, H = 0, and C = 4*1 = 4; hence n 
= 0 2*1 3*0 4 -3*2 = 0. It is Ok!  
b. Sufficient condition  
There are three rigid bod ies including the Earth, (BDC) and (DF), we need to 
determine the geometrically (in)stable characteristics of the whole structure.  
 Way 1: (In-order connection)  
Connect the Earth to (BDC) using three type -1 connections (AB, DE and type -1 
connection at point  C). Since their axis directions are not parallel  and intersectional, 
so the Earth and (BDC) connected to form a new rigid body (I). Finally, (I) and (DF) 
are connected by one pinned connection at D and one type -1 connection at F with 
its axis direction do es not pass by the pinned connection  at D. Therefore, the given 
structure is geometrically stable.  
 Way 2: (Round -robin connection)  
27 
 Three rigid bodies including the Earth, (BDC) and (DF) are connected together by 
three virtually pinned connections. These virtual  pins do not lie in the same straight 
line, so the given structure is geometrically stable.  
 